Explanation of Parsing vs. Compilation vs. Runtime (#8744)
dbt-labs/dbt-core: core/dbt/parser/parsing-vs-compilation-vs-runtime.md

- dbt doesn’t directly modify or rewrite user-provided **Python** code at all. Instead, "compilation" looks like code generation: appending more methods that allow calls to `dbt.ref()`, `dbt.source()`, and `dbt.config.get()` to return the correct results at runtime.

</details>

<details>
<summary>If your model’s code uses a dynamic query to template code, this requires a database connection.</summary>

- At this point, [`execute`](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/execute) is set to `True`.
- e.g. `dbt_utils.get_column_values`, `dbt_utils.star`
- Jinja-SQL supports this sort of dynamic templating. Python does not; there are other imperative ways to do this, using DataFrame methods / the Python interpreter at runtime.

</details>

<details>
<summary>Compilation is also when ephemeral model CTEs are interpolated into the models that `ref` them.</summary>

- The code for this is *gnarly*. That’s all I’m going to say about it for now.

</details>

<details>
<summary>When compiling happens for a given node varies by command.</summary>

>     - For example, if one model’s templated SQL depends on an introspective query that expects another model to have already been materialized, this can lead to errors.

Author: ```suggestion
- For example, if one model’s templated SQL depends on an introspective query that expects another model to have already been materialized, this can lead to errors.
```

- There is a command called `parse`, which does **just** "parsing" + "resolving," as a way to measure parsing performance in large projects. That command is the fastest way to write `manifest.json` (since v1.5).
- In large projects, the parsing step can also be quite slow: reading lots of files, doing lots of dataclass validation, creating lots of links between lots of nodes. (See below for details on two potential optimizations.)

### Two potential optimizations

1. [**"Partial parsing."**](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/parsing#partial-parsing) dbt saves the mostly-done Manifest from last time, in a file called `target/partial_parse.msgpack`. dbt **just** reads the files that have changed (based on file system metadata), and makes partial updates to that mostly-done Manifest. Of course, if a user has updated configuration that could be relevant globally (e.g. `dbt_project.yml`, `--vars`), we have to opt for a full re-parse — better safe (slow & correct) than sorry (fast & incorrect).

> 2. Reusing manifests: https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/programmatic-invocations#reusing-objects. Note that this is taking "full control," and there are failure modes (example: [dbt-core#7945](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/issues/7945)).

Author: ```suggestion
2. [**"Reusing manifests."**](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/programmatic-invocations#reusing-objects) Note that this is taking "full control," and there are failure modes (example: [dbt-core#7945](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/issues/7945)).
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>If your model’s code uses a dynamic query to template code, this requires a database connection.</summary>

- At this point, [`execute`](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/execute) is set to `True`.
- e.g. `dbt_utils.get_column_values`, `dbt_utils.star`
- Jinja-SQL supports this sort of dynamic templating. Python does not; there are other imperative ways to do this, using DataFrame methods / the Python interpreter at runtime.

</details>

<details>
<summary>Compilation is also when ephemeral model CTEs are interpolated into the models that `ref` them.</summary>

- The code for this is *gnarly*. That’s all I’m going to say about it for now.

</details>

<details>
<summary>When compiling happens for a given node varies by command.</summary>

    - For example, if one model’s templated SQL depends on an introspective query that expects another model to have already been materialized, this can lead to errors.

>     - `dbt compile` has not historically supported `--defer`, but this was added in v1.3 (with [one known bug](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/issues/6124)).

Author: ```suggestion
```

# Parsing vs. Compilation vs. Runtime

## Context: Why this doc?

There’s a lot of confusion about what dbt does at parse time vs. compile time / runtime. Even that separation is a relative simplification: parsing includes multiple steps, and while there are some distinctions between "compiling" and "running" a model, the two are **very** closely related.

It's come up many times before, and we expect it will keep coming up! A decent number of bug reports in `dbt-core` are actually rooted in a misunderstanding of when configs are resolved, especially when folks are using pre/post hooks, or configs that alter materialization behavior (`partitions`, `merge_exclude_columns`, etc).

So, here goes.

## What is "parsing"?

**In a sentence:** dbt reads all the files in your project, and constructs an internal representation of the project ("manifest").

To keep it really simple, let’s say this happens in two steps: "Parsing" and "Resolving."

### Parsing

> As a user, you write models as SQL + YAML. dbt wants to understand that model as a Python object, defined by an internal data structure. It also wants to know its dependencies and configuration (= its place in the DAG). dbt reads your code **for that one model,** and attempts to construct that object, raising a **validation** error if it can’t.

Reviewer: nit, feel free to disregard: I think switching 'that model' with 'each model' would read more clearly in this sentence relative to the plural 'models' in the beginning

> As a user, you write models as SQL + YAML. dbt wants to understand that model as a Python object, defined by an internal data structure. It also wants to know its dependencies and configuration (= its place in the DAG). dbt reads your code **for that one model,** and attempts to construct that object, raising a **validation** error if it can’t.

Author: ```suggestion
As a user, you write models as SQL + YAML. dbt wants to understand each model as a Python object, defined by an internal data structure. It also wants to know its dependencies and configuration (= its place in the DAG). dbt reads your code **for that one model,** and attempts to construct that object, raising a **validation** error if it can’t.
```

<details>
<summary>(Toggle for many more details.)</summary>

- (Because your SQL and YAML live in separate files, this is actually two steps. But for things like `sources`, `exposures`, `metrics`, `tests`, it’s a single pass.)
- dbt needs to capture and store two vital pieces of information: **dependencies** and **configuration**.

>     - We need to know the shape of the DAG. That includes which models are disabled, in addition to which models will be depending on which other models.

Reviewer: is there something missing after 'will be...'?

>     - We need to know the shape of the DAG. That includes which models are disabled, in addition to which models will be depending on which other models.

Author: I'm guessing this was the intent? Rolling with it.
```suggestion
    - We need to know the shape of the DAG. This includes which models are disabled. It also includes dependency relationships between models.
```

    - Plus, certain configurations have implications for **node selection**, which supports selecting models using the `tag:` and `config:` methods.
- Parsing also resolves the configuration for that model, based on configs set in `dbt_project.yml`, and macros like `generate_schema_name`. (These are "special" macros, whose results are saved at parse time!)
- The way dbt parses models depends on the language that model is written in.

>     - Python models are statically analyzed using the Python AST. [This is pretty fast.](https://www.notion.so/f113894b4cb7412e83b7f9fdb3a24cdb?pvs=21)

Author: ```suggestion
    - Python models are statically analyzed using the Python AST.
```

>     - Python models are statically analyzed using the Python AST. [This is pretty fast.](https://www.notion.so/f113894b4cb7412e83b7f9fdb3a24cdb?pvs=21)

Reviewer 2: This is a link to an internal Notion doc. We should either remove, or qualify the "pretty fast" by picking a number from the doc

Author: Removing

### Compiling a model

We use the word "compiling" in a way that’s confusing for most software engineers (and many other people). Most of what’s described above, parsing + validating + constructing a Manifest (internal representation), falls more squarely in the traditional role of a language compiler. By contrast, when we talk about "compiling SQL," we’re really talking about something that happens at **runtime**.

Devils in the details; toggle away.

<details>
<summary>The mechanism of "compilation" varies by model language.</summary>

- **Jinja-SQL** wants to compile down to "vanilla" SQL, appropriate for this database, where any calls to `ref('something')` have been replaced with `database.schema.something`.
- dbt doesn’t directly modify or rewrite user-provided **Python** code at all. Instead, "compilation" looks like code generation: appending more methods that allow calls to `dbt.ref()`, `dbt.source()`, and `dbt.config.get()` to return the correct results at runtime.

</details>

<details>
<summary>If your model’s code uses a dynamic query to template code, this requires a database connection.</summary>

> - At this point, `[execute](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/execute)` is set to `True`.

Author: ```suggestion
- At this point, [`execute`](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/execute) is set to `True`.
```

> - At this point, `[execute](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/execute)` is set to `True`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- At this point, <a href="https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/execute">execute</a>` is set to `True`.
```

- e.g. `dbt_utils.get_column_values`, `dbt_utils.star`
- Jinja-SQL supports this sort of dynamic templating. Python does not; there are other imperative ways to do this, using DataFrame methods / the Python interpreter at runtime.

</details>

<details>
<summary>Compilation is also when ephemeral model CTEs are interpolated into the models that `ref` them.</summary>

- The code for this is *gnarly*. That’s all I’m going to say about it for now.

</details>

<details>
<summary>When compiling happens for a given node varies by command.</summary>

> - In `dbt compile`, every model is compiled concurrently, up to the number of threads, rather than in DAG order.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> - In `dbt compile`, every model is compiled concurrently, up to the number of threads, rather than in DAG order.

Reviewer 2: Since I wrote this, I figured out that it isn't actually how it works today. It _should_ work this way:
- https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/issues/7914

Let's cut the bullet for now

    - For example, if one model’s templated SQL depends on an introspective query that expects another model to have already been materialized, this can lead to errors.

>     - `dbt compile` has not historically supported `--defer`, but this was added in v1.3 (with [one known bug](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/issues/6124)).

Reviewer 2: Let's cut this bullet - irrelevant for most recent versions

- In `dbt run`, models are operated on in DAG order, where operating on one model means compiling it and then running its materialization. This way, if a downstream model’s compiled SQL will depend on an introspective query against the materialized results of an upstream model, we wait to compile it until the upstream model has completely finishing running.

</details>

</br>

The outcome of compiling a model is updating its Manifest entry in two important ways:
- `compiled` is set to `True`
- `compiled_code` is populated with (what else) the compiled code for this model

### Running / materializing a model

A model’s `compiled_code` is passed into the materialization macro, and the materialization macro is executed. That materialization macro will also call user-provided pre- and post-hooks, and other built-in macros that return the appropriate DDL + DML statements (`create`, `alter`, `merge`, etc.)

> (It’s set to a context variable named [`sql`](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/blob/16f529e1d4e067bdbb6a659a622bead442f24b4e/core/dbt/context/providers.py#L1314-L1323), which you’ll see in some materializations — and we should really change that to just `model['compiled_code']`.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(For legacy reasons, `compiled_code` is also available as a context variable named [`sql`](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/blob/16f529e1d4e067bdbb6a659a622bead442f24b4e/core/dbt/context/providers.py#L1314-L1323). You'll see it referenced as `sql` in some materializations. Going forward, `model['compiled_code']` is a better way to access this.)
```

    - You must declare all dependencies & configurations ahead of time, rather than imperatively redefining them at runtime. You cannot dynamically redefine the DAG on the basis of a query result.
    - This is limiting for some advanced use cases, but it prevents you from solving hard problems in exactly the wrong ways.
- **The separation of modeling code** ("logical" transformation written in SQL, or DataFrame manipulations) **from materialization code** ("physical" state changes via DDL/DML)**.**
    - Every model is "just" a `select` statement, or a Python DataFrame. It can be developed, previewed, and tested as such, *without* mutating database state. Those mutations are defined declaratively, with reusable boilerplate ("view" vs. "table" vs. "incremental"), rather than imperatively each time.

## Appendix

<details>
<summary>Click to toggle notes on parsing</summary>

### Notes on parsing

- **dbt has not yet connected to a database.** Every step performed thus far has required only project files, configuration, and `dbt-core`. You can perform parsing without an Internet connection.

> - There is a command called `parse`, which does **just** "parsing" + "resolving," as a way to measure parsing performance in large projects. That command *could* write `manifest.json` once it's done; it doesn't, today, for no particular reason. (We're thinking about changing this.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- There is a command called `parse`, which does **just** "parsing" + "resolving," as a way to measure parsing performance in large projects. That command is the fastest way to write `manifest.json` (since v1.5).
```

- In large projects, the parsing step can also be quite slow: reading lots of files, doing lots of dataclass validation, creating lots of links between lots of nodes. (See below for details on two potential optimizations.)

### Two potential optimizations

1. [**"Partial parsing."**](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/parsing#partial-parsing) dbt saves the mostly-done Manifest from last time, in a file called `target/partial_parse.msgpack`. dbt **just** reads the files that have changed (based on file system metadata), and makes partial updates to that mostly-done Manifest. Of course, if a user has updated configuration that could be relevant globally (e.g. `dbt_project.yml`, `--vars`), we have to opt for a full re-parse — better safe (slow & correct) than sorry (fast & incorrect).

> 2. **A dbt Server.** Both the new `dbt-server` and the old `dbt-rpc` server have mechanisms to separate parsing from execution. They save a Manifest for reuse between commands. When files change, they trigger a re-parse and re-construction of the Manifest behind the scenes. This way, you don’t have to wait for re-parsing (even partial parsing) when you actually submit a command; it’s ready for you. The new approach, taken by `dbt-server` + Runtime, is much more resilient and less brittle than the previous approach in `dbt-rpc`.

Reviewer 2: Let's update (2) to be about "manifest reuse" instead of dbt-rpc / dbt Server. Something like:
```suggestion
2. Reusing manifests: https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/programmatic-invocations#reusing-objects. Note that this is taking "full control," and there are failure modes (example: [dbt-core#7945](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/issues/7945)).
```
